Positioning Applied - Layout And Sizing
=======================================

Layout in Famo.us is managed entirely by Transforms. You could simply use transitions,
modifiers with transforms, and surfaces for nearly every feature offered by Famo.us. Famo.us does,
however, supply some layout helpers by way of origin and size in modifiers, which will
change the end transform that gets applied to your surfaces. Size and origin can be used
for such things as translating surfaces one after another (like scrollview), or rotating
surfaces in a circle.

Overview
================================================================================

- [Modifiers](#modifiers)
  - [Transform](#transform)
  - [Size](#size)
  - [Origin](#origin)
- [Review](#review)

<a name="modifiers">Modifiers</a>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All modfiers before a surface will affect it in an additive manner, from the surface to the
Context. The only layout and sizing relevant properties of the modifier are size, transform,
and origin. All three interact with each other.

<a name="transform">Transform</a>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Transforms are basically sixteen value arrays, used as an inline style tag in HTML to tell
the DOM element where it is on the screen. All of our surfaces are given transforms,
which default to the identity transform, but can be changed by the modifiers added before
the surface.


#####Transform.Identity
Any method of the transform library returns a new transform based off of the
"identity" transform. The identity transform is a singleton constant, and pretty
much anything involving layout will involve it somehow so you should NEVER EVER change it.
The identity transform is the only transform that doesn't affect a surface at all.
A surface with the identity transform appears in the top left corner of your screen.

The identity transform looks like this:

```js
  [1, 0, 0, 0,
   0, 1, 0, 0,
   0, 0, 1, 0,
   0, 0, 0, 1]
```

We can safely ignore the fourth column- it's only relevant for really custom transforms
and never gets changed in our engine (it's really just there for normalization).

#####Transform.Translate(x, y, z)
The translate transform looks like this:

```js
  [1, 0, 0, 0,
   0, 1, 0, 0,
   0, 0, 1, 0,
   x, y, z, 1]
```
Translate is probably the most important transform for layout. Translate will move
its dom element by the amount specified in each direction. If you wanted to center
a surface, it would be as simple as calling

```js
  context.add(new Modifier({
    transform: Transform.translate(window.innerWidth * 0.5, window.innerHeight *0.5)
  })).add(surface)
```

#####Transform.Scale(x, y, z)

The scale transform looks like this:

```js
  [x, 0, 0, 0,
   0, y, 0, 0,
   0, 0, z, 0,
   0, 0, 0, 1]
```

A scale transform scales its DOM element in the intended axis without changing it's size in
HTML. As we saw in identity, the default scale of each axis is 1. Setting the scale
in any axis to two would double the DOM elements area in that axis. Scaling in Z doesn't
work for DOM elements- any scaling in Z that isn't 1 will shrink the element to
a point because DOM elements are mathematically two dimensional.

#####Transform.rotateX(radians)
The X rotation transform looks like this:

```js
  [1, 0, 0, 0,
   0, Math.cos(radians), Math.sin(-radians), 0,
   0, Math.sin(radians), Math.cos(radians), 0,
   0, 0 , 0, 1]
```

The X rotation transform rotates its surface around its X axis.

One important thing to note: if you're multiplying a rotation matrix with a translation
matrix, the order in which the multiplication happens is very important. There are three
ways of combining the two:

```js
  1.Transform.multiply(Transform.translate(0, 50), Transform.rotateX(Math.PI * 0.2));
  or
  Transform.multiply(Transform.rotateX(Math.PI * 0.2), Transform.translate(0, 50));

  2. Transform.moveThen([0, 50], Transform.rotateX(Math.PI * 0.2));
  or
  Transform.thenMove(Transform.rotateX(Math.PI * 0.2), [0, 50]);

  3.context.add(new Modifier({
    transform: Transform.translate(0, 50)
  })).add(new Modifier({
    transform: Transform.rotateX(Math.PI * 0.2)
  })).add(surface);
  or
  context.add(new Modifier({
    transform: Transform.rotateX(Math.PI * 0.2)
  })).add(new Modifier({
    transform: Transform.translate(0, 50)
  })).add(surface);
```

The main concept here is that translation is applied with respect to the surface's
rotation. An unrotated surface, when translated forwards in Z, will come towards you directly
. However, a rotated surface will move forwards from its perspective.

In the first method, both permutations will apply the rotation and translation at the same
time, so as the surface rotates, it'll simultaneously translate, giving it a circular
trajectory through z space.

In the second and third method however, the translation and rotation happen distinctly.
moveThen and thenMove take both a matrix and a three-value array for translation- moveThen applies
the translation first and then rotates the translated surface, thenMove will do the opposite.
Modifiers will be applied in order, multiplying the transforms modifiers added after them.
Rotating your surface before you translate it will move it upwards, translating it before
you rotate it will move it towards you and then rotate it.

#####Transform.rotateY(radians)
rotateY follows the same paradigm as rotateX, only it rotates around the surface's
y axis.

The Y rotation transform looks like this:

```js
  [Math.cos(radians), 0, Math.sin(radians), 0,
   0, 1, 0, 0,
   Math.sin(radians), 0, Math.cos(radians), 0,
   0, 0, 0, 1]
```

#####Transform.rotateZ(radians)
rotateX follows the same paradigm as rotateX, only it rotates around the surface's
z axis.

The Z rotation transform looks like this:

```js
  [Math.cos(radians), Math.sin(-radians), 0, 0,
   Math.sin(radians), Math.cos(radians), 0, 0,
   0, 0, 1, 0,
   0, 0, 0, 1]
```

<a name="size">Size</a>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Size is most often paired with origin, but it does have some independent uses.
Views like Scrollview, Scroller, and GridLayout use the size of sequenced renderables in order
to translate them by the width or height of preceding renderables. If, for some reason,
you wanted a surface to occupy a larger or smaller size in famo.us internals, without
changing the actual size of the DOM element, you can add it after a modifier with a
size property, e.g.

```js
  context.add(new Modifier({
    size: [200, 200]
  })).add(new Surface({
    properties: {
      background: 'red'
    },
    size: [150, 150]
  }));
```

For a more specific example, sequencing from an array of views with the sized modifier
paradigm can produce a neat spacing effect:

```js
  //gives you a buffer of ten pixels at the bottom of every renderable
  var views = [];
  for (i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
    var view = new View();
    var sizedModifier = new Modifier({
        size:  [undefined, 110]
      })
    var surface = new Surface({
      properties: {
        background: 'red'
      },
      size: [undefined, 100]
    })
    view.add(sizeModifier).add(surface);
  }
  scrollview.sequenceFrom(views);
```

Internally, views that use size rely upon calling their renderables' getSize method.
Generally, you can safely size renderables without having to concern yourself with
the getSize method, except when dealing with a view with branches. In that case,
the recommended pattern is to overwrite the views' getSize method, either through subclassing,
our through overwriting the property, e.g.

```js
  var view = new View();
  var firstBranchModifier = new Modifier({
      size:  [100, 110]
  })
  var firstBranchsurface = new Surface({
    properties: {
      background: 'red'
    },
    size: [100, 100]
  })
  var secondBranchModifier = new Modifier({
      transform: Transform.translate(0, firstBranchModifier.getSize())
  })
  var secondBranchsurface = new Surface({
    properties: {
      background: 'blue'
    },
    size: [100, 100]
  })
  view.add(firstBranchModifier).add(firstBranchSurface);
  view.add(secondBranchModifier).add(secondBranchSurface);

  view.getSize = function() {
    //returns the combined size of the two surfaces
    return [100, 210]
  }

```

<a name="origin">Origin</a>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Origin interacts with both size and transforms. The internal implementation of origin
is that origin is multiplied against the size of the parent (defaults to [window.innerWidth, window.innerHeight]
if you don't specify a size in any preceding modifier) and used to apply a moveThen and an
aboutOrigin transform to the transform of the child. This has the visual effect of applying transforms about
a certain point of the parent size. For instance:

```js
    var test = new Surface({
        size: [100, 100],
        properties: {
            background: 'red'
        },
    });

    var originMod = new Modifier({
        origin: [1, 0]
    });

    var sizeMod = new Modifier({
        size: [100, 100]
    });

    var rotateMod = new Modifier();

    var rotateTransition = {
        duration: 800,
    };

    mainContext.add(sizeMod).add(originMod).add(rotateMod).add(test);

    rotateMod.setTransform(Transform.rotateY(Math.PI * 0.4), rotateTransition);
```

In this example, we're applying an origin point of the opposite side to a rotation transform
with respect to a parent size context equal to the size of the surface. This has the visual effect of rotating from
the opposite side of the surface.

#####Origin and size
Part of how origin affects subsequent transforms is a moveThen multiplication, which
has an element of translation, specifically x and y translation as a function of multiplying
origin against the size of its parent context. This conveniently allows you to use origin
for positioning as well as things like rotating around a different origin axis. For example:

```js
  var sizeMod = new Modifier({
    size: [window.innerWidth * 0.5, window.innerHeight * 0.5]
  });
  var originMod = new Modifier({
    origin: [0.5, 0.5]
  });
  var test = new Surface({
      size: [100, 100],
      properties: {
          background: 'red'
      },
  });
  mainContext.add(sizeMod).add(originMod).add(test);
```

In this example, we're centering text to an area half the size of your screen, positioning
the surface in the top left corner. Had we not specified a size, the surface would've
appeared in the center of the screen, as the parent context size defaults to [window.innerWidth, window.innerHeight].

```js
  var sizeMod = new Modifier({
    size: [window.innerWidth * 0.5, window.innerHeight * 0.5]
  });
  var originMod = new Modifier({
    origin: [0.5, 0.5]
  });
  var firstOriginMod = new Modifier({
    origin: [0.5, 0.5]
  })
  var test = new Surface({
      size: [100, 100],
      properties: {
          background: 'red'
      },
  });
  mainContext.add(firstOriginMod).add(sizeMod).add(originMod).add(test);
```

Now our surface appears in the center of the screen, as the smaller size context we were
setting tests' origin point from has also been centered.

#####Origin and transforms
As we saw in the first example, origin can be used to modify the origin point of transforms
when placed before them in an add chain. However, the interaction of applying a transform to an
origin is important and distinct, as well.

```js
var test = new Surface({
    size: [100, 100],
    properties: {
        background: 'red'
    },
});

var originMod = new Modifier({
    origin: [1, 0]
});

var sizeMod = new Modifier({
    size: [500, 500]
});

var rotateMod = new Modifier();

var rotateTransition = {
    duration: 800,
};

mainContext.add(sizeMod).add(rotateMod).add(originMod).add(test);

rotateMod.setTransform(Transform.rotateY(Math.PI * 0.4), rotateTransition);
```

Now we see test rotating backwards in z space in an arc. What's occurring is that the rotateMod's
rotation transform is being multiplied against the translation supplied by origin (translating
it to the opposite side of the parent context), and as discussed in the transforms section
a translation is applied from the surface's perspective, so as it rotates, it's forward
direction changes. If you think of origin as a special transform which applies both
translation and modification of the origin point of subsequent transforms, these interactions
become a lot more clear.

<a name="review">Review</a>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In this section, we learned that all layout in Famo.us is directed by transforms.
Size is used by higher-level views to know how to layout renderables with translation,
and also to enable the special origin transform. Origin can be used to both position
child renderables with respect to their parent context, and to change the origin point
child transforms are applied around.
